it's one thing to provide food and
shelter in return for protection but
it's quite another thing to be compelled
to provide a home where before there was
none but some insects have the ability
to force a plant to do just that
they're called Gollum acres and this oak
tree is infested with them this odd
wrinkled object at the base of an acorn
is known as another go inside there's
the tiny grub of a minut wasp to
understand how it got there we have to
go back to last spring
this tiny insect scarcely bigger than a
mosquito is one of these gall wasps
there are lots of them flying around the
oak flowers most of the flowers by now
have been pollinated and are about to
develop into acorns the goal was to have
mated and this female is looking for the
place to lay her eggs she thrusts her
ovipositor into the base of the
fertilized flower and injects an egg and
that triggers a profound genetic change
in the growing out bud
it develops not into an acorn but into
something very different a Gore within
the tiny larvae whose secretions have
caused the change feeds on the oak trees
tissues as summer proceeds the goals
become increasingly hard and wouldn't
autumn comes and the oak tree starts to
shed its leaves it's shutting down to
the winter and with its leaves go both
acorns and goals
plant and insect life is suspended but
unseen changes are nevertheless taking
place spring comes at last
inside the Gaul something starts moving
the lava has turned into an adult wasp
it has spent nine months within the oak
trees tissues it is only a few weeks of
its life left now as an adult it must
look for another oak to inject with eggs
a single oak tree may be afflicted by 70
different kinds of gall each produced by
different species of wasp and each with
its own particular contorted shape these
hard shells may seem to be effective
defenses for the little grub inside them
but not necessarily so this is another
kind of gall wasp and she's not a
genetic engineer she is a burglar behind
her she trails her equipment for
breaking and entering a drill she
carefully selects a site for her
operations and takes aim
she flicks away the drool sheath and
starts work aim has to be very accurate
if she's to strike a target the lava at
the goal center
the tip of her drill has a sharp cutting
edge of metallic zinc which pierces the
gall tissues with ease when she detects
that she's reached the central chamber a
microscopic egg travels down the center
of the drill and into the larvae the
operation is over her offspring will now
hatch in the gall center consumed the
flesh of the resident larvae and take
over the gall